WEEK 11
Working on windows 11
Exercise 1: Jenkins CI/CD  using Git Webhook
Step-1: To install ngroks Go->settings->privacy and security -> windows security -> off antivirus ->


Step-2:Go -> https://ngrok.com and signup by giving your name ,email and password of atleast 10 charcaters




Step-3: After sign in up ,it will show below screen with your name in the top left  .now click on download for windows (64Bit) to download ngork



Step4:After downloading ,Extract the file and click on ngrok.exe



Ngrok command prompt appears as below


Step-5:Connect Your ngrok Account (optional but useful)
Go to ngrok gives you an auth token.
Then go to your Authtoken click here 
   				Copy  your Authtoken 




CREATE AUTHENTICATOR [https://dashboard.ngrok.com/get-started/your-authtoken]
Run this command in ngrok command prompt:(replace <your_token> with yours):

ngrok config add-authtoken <your_token>  // syntax: 
Example command 
ngrok config add-authtoken 34ejJvRYKqtjvBUEYEnxudIbpb7_33i6pYx8BJ2cZ1TpwasWq




Step-6
Start a Tunnel for Jenkins
Check on which port  is your Jenkins running . for this give in browers or url localhost:8081
For me Jenkins is running on 8081
Go to ngrok command prompt and type below command 
ngork http 8081    //Always use this  command to start a tunnel for jenkins . 

Type in ngrok command prompt:

Next it shows this public jenkins URL generated by ngrok that can be pasted into github repo for Webhooks.




Copy this URL only highlighted part



Step-7: Configure Webhook in GitHub
1.Go to your GitHub repository.
2.Navigate to Settings → Webhooks.
3.Click “Add webhook”.
4.In the Payload URL field:
oEnter the Jenkins webhook URL in the format:
http://<jenkins-server-url>/github-webhook/
Ex:  https://unhired-stormily-alaine.ngrok-free.dev/github-webhook/

Note: If Jenkins is running on localhost, GitHub cannot access it directly












Step-8: 
Add url https://unhired-stormily-alaine.ngrok-free.dev/github-webhook/
Set content Type to application/json
Under “Which events would you like to trigger this webhook?”, select:
Just the push event.
Click “Add webhook” to save.









 Step 10: Configure Jenkins to Accept GitHub Webhooks
1.Open Jenkins Dashboard.









2.Select the job (freestyle or pipeline) you’ve already created.


3.Click Configure.
4.Scroll down to the Build Triggers section.
5.Check the box: ✅GitHub hook trigger for GITScm polling

6.Click Save.

 Step 11: Test the Setup
1.Make any code update in your local repo and push it to GitHub.
2.Once pushed, GitHub will trigger the webhook.
3.Jenkins will automatically detect the change and start the build pipeline.
  

outcome
You’ve successfully connected GitHub and Jenkins using webhooks.
Every time you push code to GitHub, Jenkins will automatically start building your project without manual intervention.

EXCERCISE-2

Setting Up   Jenkins Email Notification Setup (Using Gmail with App Password)
Creation of app password
1. Gmail: Enable App Password (for 2-Step Verification)
i. Go to: https://myaccount.google.com
ii. Enable 2-Step Verification
Navigate to:
oSecurity → 2-Step Verification
oTurn it ON
oComplete the OTP verification process (via phone/email)
iii. Generate App Password for Jenkins
Go to:
oSecurity → App passwords
Select:
oApp: Other (Custom name)
oName: Jenkins-Demo
Click Generate
Copy the 16-digit app password
oSave it in a secure location (e.g., Notepad)
                 2.  Jenkins Plugin Installation
i. Open Jenkins Dashboard
ii. Navigate to:
Manage Jenkins → Manage Plugins
iii. Install Plugin:
Search for and install:
oEmail Extension Plugin

3. Configure Jenkins Global Email Settings
i. Go to:
Manage Jenkins → Configure System

A. E-mail Notification Section
Field	Value
SMTP Server	smtp.gmail.com
Use SMTP Auth	✅ Enabled
User Name	Your Gmail ID (e.g., archanareddykmit@gmail.com)
Password	Paste the 16-digit App Password
Use SSL	✅ Enabled
SMTP Port	465
Reply-To Address	Your Gmail ID (same as above)
➤ Test Configuration
Click: Test configuration by sending test e-mail
Provide a valid email address to receive a test mail
✅ Should receive email from Jenkins

B. Extended E-mail Notification Section
Field	Value
SMTP Server	smtp.gmail.com
SMTP Port	465
Use SSL	✅ Enabled
Credentials	Add Gmail ID and App Password as Jenkins credentials
Default Content Type	text/html or leave default
Default Recipients	Leave empty or provide default emails
Triggers	Select as per needs (e.g., Failure)

4.  Configure Email Notifications for a Jenkins Job
i. Go to:
Jenkins → Select a Job → Configure

ii. In the Post-build Actions section:
Click: Add post-build action → Editable Email Notification
A. Fill in the fields:
Field	Value
Project Recipient List	Add recipient email addresses (comma-separated)
Content Type	Default (text/plain) or text/html
Triggers	Select events (e.g., Failure, Success, etc.)
Attachments	(Optional) Add logs, reports, etc.

iii. Click Save

 Now your Jenkins job is set up to send email notifications based on the build status!

Takeaway :
Students learned how to integrate Jenkins with GitHub using webhooks to automate build triggers and configure email notifications to monitor build success or failure effectively.

